It's an article of faith in the school reform community that we should be
striving to prepare all students for success in college-if not a four-year
degree, then some other recognized and reputable post-secondary credential. The
rationale is clear and generally compelling; as a recent Pew study reiterated,
people who graduate from college earn significantly more than those who do not.
Other research indicates that low-income students in particular benefit from
college, becoming nearly three times more likely to make it into the middle
class than their peers who earn some (or no) college credits. And it's not just
about money: College graduates are also healthier, more involved in their
communities, and happier in their jobs. Thus, in the reformers' bible, the
greatest sin is to look a student in the eye and say, "Kid, I'm sorry, but
you're just not college material. But what if such a cautionary sermon is
exactly what some teenagers need? What if encouraging students to take a shot at
the college track-despite very long odds of crossing its finish line-does them
more harm than good? What if our own hyper-credentialed life experiences and
ideologies are blinding us to alternative pathways to the middle class?
Including some that might be a lot more viable for a great many young people?
What if we should be following the lead of countries like Germany, where
"tracking" isn't a dirty word but a common-sense way to prepare teenagers for
respected, well-paid work? Here's a stark fact: According to research by
Georgetown's Anthony Carnevale and Jeff Strohl, less than 10 percent of poor
children now graduate with a four-year college degree. Imagine that all of our
reform efforts prove successful, from initiatives to bolster the prenatal health
of disadvantaged babies, to high-quality early-childhood experiences, to
dramatic improvements in K-12 education, to serious interventions and supports
at the college level. Push the pedal to the metal and assume that nothing
crashes. Where do we get? Maybe in the course of a generation, we could double
the proportion of poor children making it to a college diploma. Tripling it
would be a staggering accomplishment. Anything approaching that would be an
enormous achievement, unprecedented in the annals of social progress. Yet that
would still leave two-thirds or more of low-income youngsters needing another
path if they're truly going to access the middle class. Let's see how this works
from the perspective of a student. Imagine that you're finishing ninth grade at
a large comprehensive urban high school. The year hasn't gone very well; because
you are reading and doing math at a sixth-grade level, much of your coursework
is a struggle. Nor have you had much of an opportunity to develop the
"non-cognitive skills" that would help you to remediate the situation. You are
foundering, failing courses, and thinking about dropping out. Though we should
be working hard to improve elementary and middle schools so that you don't reach
this point, the fact remains that you have. A rational system would acknowledge
that, with just three years until graduation, the likelihood of you getting to a
true "college readiness" level by the end of 12th grade is extremely low. Even
if all the pieces come together in dramatic fashion-you get serious help with
your basic skills, someone finds you a great mentor, your motivation for hitting
the books increases significantly-you probably aren't going to make it. You need
another pathway, one with significantly greater chances of success and a real
payoff at the end-a job that will allow you to be self-sufficient. You need
high-quality career and technical education, ideally the kind that combines
rigorous coursework with a real-world apprenticeship, and maybe even a paycheck.
To be sure, your long-term earnings will probably be lower than if you squeak
out a college degree. But that's a false choice, because you're almost surely
not going to get that college degree anyway. The decision is whether to follow
the college route to almost certain failure, or to follow another route to
significant success. But our system isn't rational, and it doesn't like to
acknowledge long odds. Perhaps it used to, but this sort of realism was judged
to be deterministic, racist, and classist. And for sure, when judgments were
made on the basis of ZIP code or skin color, the old system was exactly that.
Those high school "tracks" were immutable, and those who wound up in "voc-ed"
(or, at least as bad, the "general" track) were those for whom secondary
schooling, in society's eyes, was mostly a custodial function. But making sure
that there are real options for our young people-options that include
high-quality career and technical education-is a totally different proposition.
We shouldn't force anyone into that route, but we also shouldn't guilt kids with
low odds of college success-regardless of their race or class-to keep trudging
through academic coursework as teens. Yet it appears that we are doing just
that; according to Kate Blosveren Kreamer of the National Association of State
Directors of Career Technical Education, only 20 percent of high school students
"concentrate" in career and technical education, even though that's a better bet
for many more of them. Then, even when students graduate high school with
seventh-grade skills, we encourage them to enroll in college, starting with
several semesters of "developmental" education. This might be the greatest
crime. How do low-income students who start community college in remedial
courses fare? According to the college-access advocacy group Complete College
America, less than 10 percent of them complete a two-year degree within three
years. Most won't ever get past their remedial courses. Almost certain
failure.Â  College access advocates look at those numbers and want to double down
on reform, seeking to improve the quality of remedial education, or to skip it
entirely, encouraging unprepared students to enroll directly in credit-bearing
courses, or to offer heavy doses of student support. All are worth trying for
students at the margins. But few people are willing to admit that perhaps
college just isn't a good bet for people with seventh-grade reading and math
skills at the end of high school. Unfortunately, our federal education policy
encourages schools and students to ignore the long odds of college success.
Federal Pell Grants, for instance, can be used for remedial education;
institutions are more than happy to take the money, even if they are terrible at
remediating students' deficits, which is why I've proposed making remedial
education ineligible for Pell financing. On the other hand, Pell can only be
used for vocational education that takes place through an accredited college or
university; job-based training, and most apprenticeships, do not qualify. That
should change. I have no desire to punish students or deprive them of
opportunity. Quite the contrary. My aim is to stop pretending that high school
or college students with very low basic skills have a real shot of earning a
college degree-so that they might follow an alternative path that will lead to
success. A college graduate will generally outearn a high school graduate, to be
sure. But a worker with technical skills will outearn a high school or college
dropout with no such skills. That's the true choice facing many students.
Furthermore, for kids facing the toughest challenges of poverty, it makes sense
to think about opportunity over multiple generations. College might catapult
prepared low-income kids into the middle class in one fell swoop, but using
high-quality career and technical education to give low-income youngsters who
are not ready for college a foothold on the ladder to success is a victory as
well. If they can escape poverty and all the social ills that come with it,
their children have a significantly better shot at the college path. After all,
that's how upward mobility in America has generally worked: Not in one bounce
but slowly and surely over decades. Happily, this sort of common sense is
starting to re-enter the conversation (thanks, in part, to the persistence of
the folks at Harvard's Pathways to Prosperity initiative, who called in 2011 for
a broader approach to education reform, one that includes high-quality career
technical education). In a very important recent Politico piece, Stephanie Simon
shows how lawmakers, especially in red states, are starting to worry that the
"college for all" ideology is doing material harm to students. Asking all
students to pass algebra II makes a ton of sense if you expect all of them to go
to college. But when you are willing to acknowledge that that's a fool's errand,
you start to see such mandates as barriers to opportunity-the opportunity to
pursue career and technical programs that are likely to produce better long-term
outcomes for young people. It's particularly urgent that those of us who support
the Common Core be willing to speak honestly about these issues. If the new
Common Core assessments set the high school graduation bar at true college
readiness-meaning students are on track to take credit bearing courses from day
one-the country is likely to learn that scarcely one-third of all students, and
many fewer low-income students, are at that level now. Even Massachusetts, our
shining star, gets just half its young people to that level. By all means, we
should do everything we can to boost those numbers, starting as early as
possible, and including common-sense reforms like reintroducing serious academic
content to the elementary and middle school curriculum and replicating "no
excuses" charter schools like KIPP.  
